Changing `tests` to `data-tests` (#4592)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/build/data-tests.md

id: "data-tests"
keywords:
  - test, tests, testing, dag
---
## Related reference docs
* [Test command](/reference/commands/test)
* [Data test properties](/reference/resource-properties/data-tests)
* [Data test configurations](/reference/data-test-configs)
* [Test selection examples](/reference/node-selection/test-selection-examples)

## Overview

Data tests are assertions you make about your models and other resources in your dbt project (e.g. sources, seeds and snapshots). When you run `dbt test`, dbt will tell you if each test in your project passes or fails.

You can use data tests to improve the integrity of the SQL in each model by making assertions about the results generated. Out of the box, you can test whether a specified column in a model only contains non-null values, unique values, or values that have a corresponding value in another model (for example, a `customer_id` for an `order` corresponds to an `id` in the `customers` model), and values from a specified list. You can extend data tests to suit business logic specific to your organization – any assertion that you can make about your model in the form of a select query can be turned into a data test.

> Both types of tests return a set of failing records. Previously, generic/schema tests returned a numeric value representing failures. Generic data tests (f.k.a. schema tests) are defined using `test` blocks instead of macros prefixed `test_`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data tests return a set of failing records. Generic data tests (f.k.a. schema tests) are defined using `test` blocks.
```

> Like almost everything in dbt, data tests are SQL queries. In particular, they are `select` statements that seek to grab "failing" records, ones that disprove your assertion. If you assert that a column is unique in a model, the test query selects for duplicates; if you assert that a column is never null, the test seeks after nulls. If the test returns zero failing rows, it passes, and your assertion has been validated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like almost everything in dbt, data tests are SQL queries. In particular, they are `select` statements that seek to grab "failing" records, ones that disprove your assertion. If you assert that a column is unique in a model, the test query selects for duplicates; if you assert that a column is never null, the test seeks after nulls. If the data test returns zero failing rows, it passes, and your assertion has been validated.
```

There are two ways of defining data tests in dbt:

> * A **singular** test is testing in its simplest form: If you can write a SQL query that returns failing rows, you can save that query in a `.sql` file within your [test directory](/reference/project-configs/test-paths). It's now a test, and it will be executed by the `dbt test` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A **singular** data test is testing in its simplest form: If you can write a SQL query that returns failing rows, you can save that query in a `.sql` file within your [test directory](/reference/project-configs/test-paths). It's now a data test, and it will be executed by the `dbt test` command.
```

> * A **generic** test is a parameterized query that accepts arguments. The test query is defined in a special `test` block (like a [macro](jinja-macros)). Once defined, you can reference the generic test by name throughout your `.yml` files—define it on models, columns, sources, snapshots, and seeds. dbt ships with four generic tests built in, and we think you should use them!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A **generic** data test is a parameterized query that accepts arguments. The test query is defined in a special `test` block (like a [macro](jinja-macros)). Once defined, you can reference the generic test by name throughout your `.yml` files—define it on models, columns, sources, snapshots, and seeds. dbt ships with four generic data tests built in, and we think you should use them!
```

> Defining data tests is a great way to confirm that your code is working correctly, and helps prevent regressions when your code changes. Because you can use them over and over again, making similar assertions with minor variations, generic data tests tend to be much more common—they should make up the bulk of your dbt testing suite. That said, both ways of defining data tests have their time and place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Defining data tests is a great way to confirm that your outputs and inputs are as expected, and helps prevent regressions when your code changes. Because you can use them over and over again, making similar assertions with minor variations, generic data tests tend to be much more common—they should make up the bulk of your dbt data testing suite. That said, both ways of defining data tests have their time and place.
```

:::tip Creating your first data tests
If you're new to dbt, we recommend that you check out our [quickstart guide](/guides) to build your first dbt project with models and tests.
:::

> ## Singular data tests

Reviewer 2: with the section title name change, check and update old anchor links to the new one. 

a bad anchor link doesn't 404. it takes the user to the top of the main instead of the actual section so not the best UX

Author: Good call out! Thanks @nghi-ly

> If you're new to dbt, we recommend that you check out our [quickstart guide](/guides) to build your first dbt project with models and tests.

Reviewer: Will we want to update the quickstart guide with unit tests in the future?

Author: I'll make a note to audit the quickstarts for any relevant updates. We don't have one strictly for testing, but rather it's a small section of a larger getting started guide

> The simplest way to define a data test is by writing the exact SQL that will return failing records. We call these "singular" tests, because they're one-off assertions usable for a single purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest way to define a data test is by writing the exact SQL that will return failing records. We call these "singular" data tests, because they're one-off assertions usable for a single purpose.
```

> These tests are defined in `.sql` files, typically in your `tests` directory (as defined by your [`test-paths` config](/reference/project-configs/test-paths)). You can use Jinja (including `ref` and `source`) in the test definition, just like you can when creating models. Each `.sql` file contains one `select` statement, and it defines one test:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These tests are defined in `.sql` files, typically in your `tests` directory (as defined by your [`test-paths` config](/reference/project-configs/test-paths)). You can use Jinja (including `ref` and `source`) in the test definition, just like you can when creating models. Each `.sql` file contains one `select` statement, and it defines one data test:
```

The name of this test is the name of the file: `assert_total_payment_amount_is_positive`. Simple enough.

Singular data tests are easy to write—so easy that you may find yourself writing the same basic structure over and over, only changing the name of a column or model. By that point, the test isn't so singular! In that case, we recommend...

> ## Generic tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Generic data tests
```

Reviewer 2: @matthewshaver : if you're gonna fold in grace's sugg above, you'll probably need to update all links that use  `/docs/build/tests#generic-tests` to be `/docs/build/tests#generic-data-tests`

> Certain data tests are generic: they can be reused over and over again. A generic test is defined in a `test` block, which contains a parametrized query and accepts arguments. It might look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certain data tests are generic: they can be reused over and over again. A generic data test is defined in a `test` block, which contains a parametrized query and accepts arguments. It might look like:
```

              field: id
```

In plain English, these data tests translate to:
* `unique`: the `order_id` column in the `orders` model should be unique
* `not_null`: the `order_id` column in the `orders` model should not contain null values
* `accepted_values`: the `status` column in the `orders` should be  one of `'placed'`, `'shipped'`, `'completed'`, or  `'returned'`
* `relationships`: each `customer_id` in the `orders` model exists as an `id` in the `customers` <Term id="table" /> (also known as referential integrity)

Behind the scenes, dbt constructs a `select` query for each data test, using the parametrized query from the generic test block. These queries return the rows where your assertion is _not_ true; if the test returns zero rows, your assertion passes.

> You can find more information about these tests, and additional configurations (including [`severity`](/reference/resource-configs/severity) and [`tags`](/reference/resource-configs/tags)) in the [reference section](/reference/resource-properties/data-tests).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find more information about these data tests, and additional configurations (including [`severity`](/reference/resource-configs/severity) and [`tags`](/reference/resource-configs/tags)) in the [reference section](/reference/resource-properties/data-tests).
```

> ### More generic data tests

Reviewer 2: same thing here. since this is a section title change, check and update anchor links if there are any

Author: FIxing it

> Those four tests are enough to get you started. You'll quickly find you want to use a wider variety of tests—a good thing! You can also install generic tests from a package, or write your own, to use (and reuse) across your dbt project. Check out the [guide on custom generic tests](/best-practices/writing-custom-generic-tests) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those four tests are enough to get you started. You'll quickly find you want to use a wider variety of tests—a good thing! You can also install generic data tests from a package, or write your own, to use (and reuse) across your dbt project. Check out the [guide on custom generic tests](/best-practices/writing-custom-generic-tests) for more information.
```
